
GenomeBugs: Insect Biodiversity Dynamics from their Genome Sequences

High-Level Project Summary:
The GenomeBugs project to study the dynamics of insects biodiversity can be a solution 
to uncover and visualize distinctive patterns embedded in the intrinsic data organization
of their whole genome sequencing. The goal is to detect, track and predict changes over 
time along the history of insects' life using, e.g., available resources from NCBI Genome 
Datasets. GenomeBugs is based on our recent Genomebits open source program to study 
characteristics of signals from genome sequences of viruses according to their progression 
along the nucleotide bases position. We aim to determine today's genetic information of 
insects at a single nucleotide level to pass it to future generations of humans. 

Link to Project "Demo":  https://github.com/canessae/GenomeBugs/blob/main/Presentation-GenomeBugs.pdf

Detailed Project Description:
Our planet Earth so far as we know is unique and it contains life depicted in millions 
of creatures of different species. Most classified species on Earth are insects, and 
our human life depends on their biodiversity, behavior and transformations. A small 
change in these variables, some species may face extinction and in turn it may affect 
our natural living environment. Therefore it becomes extremely urgent to combat any 
loss of life biodiversity for the well-being of all species.

To achieve this goal, we propose to consider quantifying and characterizing the 
dynamics of insects biodiversity in order to preserve and understand better their Nature.

We aim to "solve" this challenge by implementing GenomeBugs, a tool to study the 
dynamics of biodiversity by uncovering distinctive patterns embedded in the intrinsic 
data organization of the genome sequences of insects.

We have developed a open source Graphics User Interface (GUI) to the intrinsic data 
organization of any genome sequences according to its progression along the nucleotide 
bases position. This method is based on a finite alternating sum series having 
independently distributed terms associated with binary (0,1) indicators for the 
nucleotide bases A,C,T,G. From the view of statistics, such a sequence is equivalent
to a discrete-valued time series for statistical identification and characterization 
of data sets as studied in financial series.

The GUI runs under Linux Ubuntu O.S., and it can be useful to study the dynamics of
insects genome variants using available available resources, e.g., those from NCBI 
Genome Datasets. 

This goal is important since allows to detect, track and predict changes over time 
along the history of insects life. If we determine historical genetic information at 
a single nucleotide level we can preserve it for the benefit of future generations.

Space Agency Data:
We used open resources and links in our project as for example:
    The National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) advances science and 
    health by providing access to biomedical and genomic information. NCBI Datasets 
    is a new resource that lets you easily gather data from across NCBI databases. 
    You can find and download gene, transcript, protein and genome sequences, 
    annotation and metadata: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/datasets/
    The GISAID Initiative which promote the rapid sharing of data from all 
    influenza viruses and the coronavirus causing COVID-19. This includes 
    genetic sequence and related clinical and epidemiological data associated 
    with human viruses, and geographical as well as species-specific data 
    associated with avian and other animal viruses, to help researchers 
    understand how viruses evolve and spread during epidemics and pandemics.  
    We were also inspired by the video of the Nasa space apps challenge 
    (Seeing the Unseeable - Viewing Bugs from Space)
    https://honeybeenet.gsfc.nasa.gov/
    Earth Science Data Systems (ESDS) Program for Genome Evolution in Polar Fishes.

References:
MOLECULAR EVOLUTION AMONG SEVERAL ORDERS OF INSECTS BASED ON MITOCHONDRIAL DNA ANALYSIS
  Hong L., PhD Thesis, Univ Simon Fraser (1993)
A database devoted to the insects of the cultural heritage
  F. FOHRER, M. MARTINEZ, F. DORKELD, J. Entomological and Acarological Research 43 (2011) 95-98
THE GLOBAL TAXONOMY INITIATIVE 2020: A STEP-BY-STEP GUIDE FOR DNA BARCODING
CBD Technical Series No. 94
Insect genomic resources: Status, availability and future
  Poonam Chilana, Anu Sharma and Anil Rai, CURRENT SCIENCE, VOL. 102, NO. 4, 25 FEBRUARY 2012
Uncovering signals from the Coronavirus Genome
  E. Canessa,    Genes (Basel) 2021 Jun 25;12(7):973. doi: 10.3390/genes12070973.   
Best Practices in Insect Genome Sequencing: What Works and What Doesn’t
 Stephen Richards and Shwetha C. Murali, Curr Opin Insect Sci. 2015 February 1; 7: 1–7. 
 doi:10.1016/j.cois.2015.02.013
Insights into the genomic evolution of insects from cricket genomes
  Guillem Ylla et al. COMMUNICATIONS BIOLOGY | (2021) 4:733 | 
  https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-021-02197-9 | www.nature.com/commsbio

Tags:
#GenomeBugs, #genomebits, #DNA, #genome, #diversity, #Nature, #Planet, #software, 
#Insects, #Bugs, #NASASpaceApps2021, #signal ,#Linux, #creativity, #awareness, #Better-world

